# Uninstalling Detox

Installing and using Detox implies certain side effects: cloned devices, cache files, state files, temporary files, etc.

This checklist might come in handy whenever you have to make a clean uninstall after using Detox.

### Detox Framework Cache

Every `npm install detox` also has a `postinstall` phase, which builds (or unpacks) `Detox.framework` into `~/Library/Detox`.

You can either delete the folder manually:

```
rm -rf ~/Library/Detox
```

or run:

```
detox clean-framework-cache
```

### Test Session State

On every test run, Detox rewrites a few temporary files in `DETOX_LIBRARY_ROOT_PATH`, i.e.:

1. The respective iOS and Android lockfiles to tell apart the busy and the available devices for use with multiple workers:
    * `device.registry.state.lock`
    * `android-device.registry.state.lock`.
1. A plain text file with the line-separated list of last failed test files to rerun via `-R <retries-count>` CLI feature:
    * `last-failed.txt`.

The location of `DETOX_LIBRARY_ROOT_PATH` may vary depending on the operating system:
* macOS:
    * `~/Library/Detox`.
* Linux:
    * `$XDG_DATA_HOME/Detox`, if `$XDG_DATA_HOME` is defined;
    * `~/.local/share/Detox`, elsewise.
* Windows:
    * `%LOCALAPPDATA%\data\Detox`, if `%LOCALAPPDATA%` is defined;
    * `%USERPROFILE%\Application Data\Detox`, otherwise.

### Cloned Simulators (macOS)

To support the "multiple workers" feature on iOS, Detox clones simulator instances when there aren't enough available ones.
The autogenerated simulators have names with `-Detox` suffix appended, so you can easily spot them with:

```
xcrun simctl list | grep "-Detox"
```

To delete a simulator, you can use:

```
xcrun simctl delete <uuid>
```

### Remnants of Artifacts

Forced exits may result in leaving some temporary files behind.

#### iOS

To ensure there are no temporary artifact files (logs, screenshots, etc.), you can run:

```
rm -rf $TMPDIR/*.detox.*
```

If you wish to clean up your iOS simulators from the installed apps and other customizations, just run the erase procedure for the relevant ones:

```
xcrun simctl erase <uuid>
```

#### Android

The advice for iOS applies to the Android virtual devices as well. To wipe user files on a specific AVD, run:

```
emulator -avd <your_AVD> -wipe-data
```

If you have to clean temporary Detox files from an individual booted device, look out for files like `11159175_0.log` in `/sdcard` folder.
You can try deleting them using a simple wildcard like below or use your own:

```
adb -s <emulator-port> shell rm -rf /sdcard/*_*.* 
```

### Detox CLI

If you have installed the official CLI wrapper for Detox, then make sure to uninstall it as well:

```
npm uninstall -g detox-cli
```
